Overview
========

Panda is a work-in-progress general-purpose programming language, featuring
things like preconditions / postconditions, immutable types, non-nullable 
references, tuples, and a lot more.

Panda is still under heavy development. A lot of things are working (including
a self-hosted compiler and both native-code and JVM output), but a couple of
important features are still missing (most notably generics) and the spec isn't
completely solidified yet. In other words, feel free to give it a try, but 
please understand that it's not quite ready for prime time yet.


Installation
============

To install Panda, see the 'INSTALL' file. Documentation lives under the 'docs'
directory (and final documentation is generated under the 'build/docs'
directory during the build process).

Note that Panda has only been tested under Mac OS X 10.8+ and Ubuntu 12.04+ so 
far. It will probably work under other Linuxes with relatively little effort, 
other Unixes with a bit more effort, and definitely will not work under 
Microsoft Windows yet. However, as Panda can also compile to JVM code and ships
with a JVM-compiled version of the compiler, you can at least play around with 
Panda on any platform with JVM support.


Copyright and License
=====================

The entirety of Panda (every file in this source tree not specifically noted as
being distributed under a different license) is copyright 2014-16 Ethan
Nicholas and is licensed under the MIT license. The MIT license a very 
permissive open-source license that allows you to do almost anything you wish 
with the software. In exchange for providing this software to you free of 
charge, I respectfully request only that you help spread the word about Panda 
should you find it to be useful. Please see the LICENSE file for the full text 
of Panda's license.


Credits
=======

Panda was created by Ethan Nicholas, ethan@ethannicholas.com. Feel free to 
contact him with any questions / complaints / bug reports, or even just to call 
him an idiot for spending three years of his life building a programming 
language.

Panda would not have been possible without lots of other amazing open-source
projects, including:

    LLVM (http://llvm.org/)
    Boehm-Demers-Weiser garbage collector (http://www.hboehm.info/gc/)
    ICU (http://site.icu-project.org/)
    V8-DTOA (https://code.google.com/p/v8/)
    SDL & SDL_image (https://www.libsdl.org/)